# 1. The subconscious mind

## Making a decision – the thought process

> “We think, each of us, that we're much more rational than we are. And we think that we make our decisions because we have good reasons to make them. Even when it's the other way around. We believe in the reasons, because we've already made the decision.” 
> —Daniel Kahneman, Nobel Prize-winning economist and behaviourist

Decision making is a sub-rational process, occurring at levels deep in the mind. While we often believe that we make decisions in a rational manner, being “truly rational” in decision making is an impossible goal to achieve in reality. 

We simply cannot weigh up all the actions available to us in any given situation and measure them against each other. Thus, we need to take shortcuts that lead to making decisions; these decisions will feel rational but are not. All this may sound like a disadvantage, but it’s a fact you can and must tap to your advantage in guiding users to desirable actions in your designs.

## The three parts of the brain

There are three parts of the brain. Each of these parts deals with a different form of decision making and thinking. The old brain deals with instincts, the midbrain with emotions and the new brain with rational thought. If you want to sell to someone online, you’re going to need to get all three parts of the brain involved in order to make sales. 

Indeed, accessing all three so that they’re in harmony and so that the “government seat” of the new brain doesn’t shut down the deal is an art. However, once you’ve devised a design that does manage to speak to all three, you’ll be well on your way to doing this with greater ease as time goes on.

- [John Assaraf](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SXfvFv-vUAk) explores the 3 brain model.

### The old brain

The old brain is all about primal decision making, or, decisions made at the most instinctual of levels, and—in the main—this is concerned with the “fight, flight or freeze” instinct which delivers a feeling of safety and security when activated. To a lesser extent, it also taps into the sexual drive, and that explains why so many sales campaigns offer sexualized images to sell products; if we can convince users they will feel safe and attractive, we’re tapping directly into the old brain. Done in the right way, that can influence their decisions regarding calls to action.

### The midbrain

The midbrain is the part of the brain that deals with emotions. It accounts for the reason that we can make decisions which are bad decisions because they feel good at the time, such as taking up smoking or eating too many cheeseburgers. This is because it makes “value” judgements which aren’t linked to actual “value” but rather to emotional value. All this may sound potentially hazardous or manipulative; all the same, as a designer, and assuming you’re working for an ethical organisation, you should tap the midbrain in order to guide users towards making choices that they believe will help them. Thier doing so will certainly help you.

### The new brain

The new brain deals with rational decision making; however, much of our “rational” approach to decision making arises after the decision rather than before it. We tend to plot our courses forward with decisions that we evaluate in retrospect or hindsight as being sound or, at least, non-harmful ones. Thus, we judge by apparent presumption using the new brain. As designers, we may not need to convince the new brain to make a decision, but it’s a good idea to involve it somewhere along the lines during the design process or there’s a good chance that the people who buy the product or service may end up unhappy with their purchase.

- [Understanding the 3 brains](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hg6XUYWj-pk) with Big Think.

## Emotional perception

Emotions aren’t rational; that means, whenever you use the three brain model (the old brain, the midbrain and the new brain model), that the new brain which deals with rational thought isn’t involved in the generation of emotions. This is rather like putting a case before a three-judge panel and appealing directly to the one who handles the emotions, who—in turn—can influence the one who handles the “fight or flight” instinct. 

When selling something online, if you can tap into the power of emotions—you can circumvent rational decision making. Thus, if you can manage to appeal to the emotions as a designer, unless you’ve got a product or service that’s priced outrageously beyond the tastes and whims even of jetsetters, you’ll have a far stronger case for getting the three brains to carry the vote and buy into what you’re selling.

- [Learn more](http://www.amnh.org/exhibitions/brain-the-inside-story/your-emotional-brain/) about the emotional brain.
- A [breakdown](http://www.cerebromente.org.br/n05/mente/struct_i.htm) of all areas of the brain that are involved with emotions.