# Business case for UX

## Business goals of UX

It's important that teams make a business case for UX because UX is grounded in return on investment. It's not just about making something look good or the user feel nice.

### Reduce development time

Early attention through user research and through obsessing about the user can reduce the product development cycle by up to *half*. UX is a helpful asset in the arsenal of trying to understand features and functionality.

### Build the right thing

By focusing early on users' context of use – what they want to do, what it's likely they'll do and what their habits are – we can understand what features to include. Ease of use over featuritis.

### Drive user adoption

User adoption is critical. In a study 72% said adoption was the most important thing compared to 16% which said software functionality. 

Willingness to purchase and likelihood to recommend goes up 14-15% with good UX. 

70% of projects fail due to lack of user acceptance.

85% of customers said they'd be willing to pay more over the standard price for a good experience, good product or service and also to ensure superior customer experience. Specifically, 55% said they would pay 10% more; 27% said they'd pay 15% more, and 10% said they would pay *25%* more.

## Team performance

Good team performance starts with management *demonstrating a belief in the importance of UX work*. 

To be truly effective, UX needs influence and autonomy.

Influence

UX needs representation at the executive level – we can't talk about UX as a business imperative or having return on investment if it's not part of the decision making process. It's not enough to be involved just at the product level.

Autonomy




There's a feedback loop between the performance of the team and the feedback they receive from users. UX teams report that they feel effective when users rate their designs as high in usability, innovation and visual polish. 



– you know, visually compelling; so, it looks great, it's innovative, and it's easy to use. And the teams that don't feel effective feel like their users rate those lower. So, there's definitely a correlation between getting a UX team performing by supporting them from a management perspective, and that passes on down to what UX people are feeling they're getting from their designs. So, it's a knock-on effect. I used to think that UX teams held the key to making users behave because they study human behavior and they understand users' behavior. But I realized that there's an interrelationship between how you manage a team and the results that they produce and then how they interact with their users and how they come back to meetings.

If a team is stressing and they are distracted by internal priorities, they're not going to have time to do the empathy and to spend the time learning about their users' pain points, because they've got too many of their own. So, I think one way to resolve this is to give UX a seat at the executive table and put UX in that business context. We can't talk about UX as a business imperative or something that is attached to ROI

without actually *connecting* it to the source of that executive decision-making. And that's a bold thing because a lot of teams see UX as this product-level thing. But, in fact, UX should go up from product all the way to executive level. And the other thing that is critical is letting UX teams have the *autonomy* so they can influence.

So, if you have the dev team down here, UX should be able to interface with those without being subordinated, by the way. So, one thing I've noticed with software development firms or independent software vendors – they're basically cultures of engineering. They tend to subordinate UX because they're more familiar with engineering. And they expect to UX to act and think and behave like engineers, which some can. But they *shouldn't*. And that's the point because – remember – they're busy advocating for the user!

They're out here getting the empathy from the users' pain points, and they're bringing that back into the organization as sprinkles, informing executives, product development and marketing teams, for example. So, it's really clear to understand that your good-performing UX team is fully empowered and is spending time with users and bringing that back to their team and not compromised, tangled in the organizational politics just because you didn't know where to put them, right?

So, let's go to *bad UX teams*. The research shows that UX management and UX effectiveness are correlated. That means that what we're seeing is that with poor UX management, the UX, the actual user experience, is hurt. And this is regardless of budget. So, budget is important, yes. But even outside of budget, teams feel that they're ineffective when they report to a department other than UX.

You know – imagine putting a marketer in the dev team. It just wouldn't seem right. It would be like putting an architect in with a plumber. Those are two very different things. A plumber is busy fixing the sink or the bathtub. And the architect is designing the interior structure and how people will feel when they're in the living room and what the space is like in the bathroom and so forth and so on. So, smaller companies have a higher *perceived UX effectiveness*, the research shows.

And I think the ways to help teams instead of getting bad performance from your team is to make sure that you're positioning them in the org chart in a way that makes sense for your company. That's usually product development or autonomously. If you have built up a UX team, give them *autonomy*. Why are they not a separate department? You know, why do they have to be co-opted? UX does *not* have to be co-opted. Now, UX shouldn't be arrogant and float up here and then just shoot – you know – riff down at other teams.

UX should be highly *collaborative*. So, it should be highly meshed with these teams, in the same way that a software architect bobs up and down. Software architects, enterprise architects are communicators. They're translators between business development and the business needs and business requirements and the senior executive team.
00:05:30 --> 00:06:03



And so, a UX resource or UX manager in a UX team performs that similar function. A couple of other tips here are make sure that you have *UX retrospectives*, that the UX team is having time to *learn and reflect*, and that they're part of the *agile retrospective process*. And, finally, *track UX data*. Track it over time and track the effectiveness and make those adjustments so that you can avoid *the ugly*, right?


And the ugly looks like people fighting over the design or jealously guarding the design; dev teams fighting with marketing teams, you know. I had a developer in a start-up say to me – and it was his baby; it was like his product – and he said, "I'm not making that change to the UI."

And I said, "Why aren't you making the change? The research is showing – the usability testing shows that users need" – you know, whatever it was: X, Y, Z. And he said, "I'm not doing that, because it's *my* code." And I was like: "Ugh!" So, in the same way, UX designers can make that mistake, too – where they jealously guard or do resume-driven design, you know. Business requirements getting *dictated* really, I should say, at the point of a gun. I've had business analysts say to me, "These are the requirements – do not change them!"

And I've designed UIs, you know. My story is I was following business requirements to the tee. I worked in an organization, and actually this team that I worked in was the "User Education Group" – you know, which was just a bad thing: the idea that users need help and they need to be educated. So, anyway, I was following the business analyst requirements to the tee. My colleague – who was a little more artistic and a little more, you know, letting his hair down –

he just went off and did his own thing, and thought about the user and thought about how the user would improve efficiency with this web application. When we came to sitting down for review, even though the business analyst said, "These are the requirements. You must follow them." My design ideas were not as well received as the other guy, who was thinking about the user. And I learned that, yes, you need to follow requirements – of course you do –

but bringing in some user balance and bringing in some user advocacy can really help the business analyst see requirements expressed in the UI from a *different perspective*. So, other things that go wrong with the ugly – designs get altered to *match the politics*. I've never seen that happen before! (I'm just kidding!) Findings Reports are *scrubbed or distorted*. They're scrubbed of insights, you know. So, we had a team say to us, "Remove that. Remove that." And we had to rewrite a report once.

This was in a consulting capacity. There was a powerful VP who didn't really understand UX and wanted to snuff UX. So, in the spirit of flexibility, we rewrote the report and we removed the design recommendations, ironically. And he said, "Don't – just describe the users' location. Just describe where they are and what their office looks like. Don't worry about the design recommendations." Well, the first thing the CEO said was, "Where are the design recommendations?

These consultants have come in here and done this field study, and they're bringing us, you know, the rooms and they're just focusing on the users, and how are we going to—?" You know; so, he was going, "How are we going to use these product requirements?" And, thankfully, the UX person in the company had the *uncensored* version and was able to send it to the CEO – which *had* the design requirements in it. But that was never aired. That issue was kept sort of in the back corridors of the organization.

And, really, the VP should have been fired or severely disciplined, or at least "reformed" – you know, sent it to training or given a talking-to or *something*. But the UX manager in this organization was not actually able to do anything. His hands were tied because he was part of the development team. He didn't have the autonomy, and the ear that he had to the CEO was *peripheral* – it was just, you know,

after the meeting, not in day-to-day business. So, this is where you see ugly. Okay the other thing is UX designers can be *inflexible*. UX designers can be jerks. Not every UX designer is communicative; not every UX designer has these social graces – the negotiation, persuasion, influence skills that you *need* when you're doing this kind of work. I once joked in a training I did for a team that this is the Usability Gestapo or the Usability Police.

And what I was doing was making fun of the fact that, okay, these are things you need to know, and then we could talk about: "Hey, we're not the bad guys. We don't want to be the bad guys." I was working with a customer around the same time, and this guy was a senior developer. And he said, "I'm *not* implementing what you gave me! *No way!* There's no way I'm implementing it!" And I said, "Okay, fine; if you want to take the executive decision not to implement that, that's up to you. But how else might you be able to solve it?" And he said, "Well, what if we just did this...and this?"

And he started to come up with solutions. And I said, "Okay, well, that would be okay. Not that...That's okay...That's okay." And he actually came up with good solutions. And what I learned from that experience was *let* developers come up with solutions. Involve developers early on. Now it's pretty standard for me to bring developers to the early-on meetings so that they can contribute to the solutions and have the visibility as to what you're thinking and what you're doing.

This can avoid the problem of coffee mugs being thrown at people, which, by the way, was something a colleague told me had happened at Razorfish a little bit after the Dot-com – I think in around 2002 or 2003. There were people throwing coffee mugs at each other. I've never had the pleasure, but... Thankfully!