# 1. 5 tactical keys
 
 1. Assess your maturity. Also assessing the perception in your organisation of UX maturity. You might think you're at one stage, but others may think differently.
 2. Get comfortable with qualatiitve research fast
 3. 




So, we're ready to climb the ladder. And I'd like to share with you five tactical keys that you can use to scale your organization's UX maturity. Now, the first one is to *assess your maturity*. And in the earlier lessons, in Lesson 1, we did that, if you remember this chart here. I would like to add that also *assessing the perception in your organization of UX maturity* can reveal a lot.

So, you might think you're at one stage, but it would be good to hear what others in your organization also think when you show them this chart – so, assessing your maturity: where you are on the spectrum. And the key in this section is that we're going to help you get to stage 3 and stage 4 – Committed and Engaged. And in the *alternative lifecycle view*, it's getting from stage 1 or 2 to *4* – so, jumping all the way up: leapfrogging, essentially, some of these steps, all the way up to 3 and 4 being the kind of sweet spot alternative chart to view here. So, the second key after you've identified where you're at and got the consensus from your organization is to *identify bright spots*. And bright spots are these kind of areas that are working well.

You know, it's easy to look at what's wrong and what's broken and what's mal-aligned and out of shape – but to recognize *what's already working*, you know. A lot of organizations are doing wireframing, and they are using wireframes as a regular kind of UX activity. So, in many organizations they don't have user testing, so that's a logical place for organizations to bolt on, to add to their wireframing process, and then field studies beyond that. So, if it's working – the wireframes are working – then using that. But what does the organization get in terms of UX? Is it pixel-perfect mock-ups? You want to start educating *away from* visual design and graphic design because that's a trap. One thing that I learned early on was

I was working in this company, and there was another UX consultant. And that UX consultant was doing wireframes that were very basic, very kind of plain: boxes and arrows, literally. And what I was doing was what I call "visually enhanced wireframes". And this helped the stakeholders see what a button might look like or what the navigation might look like. The other information architect, this consultant, said, "Oh, that's up to the designers. I'm just specifying the underlying..." – you know.

So, having that pure approach kind of created a block there. So, what I was doing was building on the wireframe and adding the visual enhancement so that the team could see what things were affordances, what things were buttons, for example, what things were menus and navbars. So, what can you build on? The other thing is: what roles are performing well in your organization and how can you co-opt those? And maybe it's not in UX. Maybe it's sales; maybe it's marketing, you know.

Maybe there's an all-star developer who is prototyping quickly and is able to take an idea that you whiteboarded and create a quick proof of concept, you know. Your senior developers or really smart developers will be able to quickly turn on and off certain functionality or pull it from a library and cobble on a rudimentary UI just to show, you know: "Maybe it's not a bad idea. Maybe it wasn't a stupid idea. Maybe it could actually work. Here's how easy it was."

I don't know how many conversations I've been in where it was like: "Oh, that idea – that's too hard to code. That's..." – you know. And I've said something like, "Do the technical analysis. Do a little proof of concept." That's the role of an architect, of a software architect or enterprise architect. – to run a POC and see if it's feasible. So, things like that, like looking at roles in the organization that may be bright spots that you can kind of highlight as *customer-centric places*, you know. And it might just be the sales team. It might just be the way that sales is reaching out and asking for opinions from users. And that helps. So, how can you build on that? How can we now validate this opinion that was gathered from a salesperson in a sales meeting – in a sales *context* – with that bias, and then get some direct access to users from that? So, it's easier said than done, *for sure*, because if you're in an organization where there's UX inertia, like the grounded or skunkworks, it's going to be a lot harder to push through because you'll just be told to – you know – it'll be a pat on the head and "Go back and create pretty pictures." So, hopefully, you're not in that organization. If you are, I feel your pain. So, the third tactic is to *develop a roadmap*. That means actually planning out your UX maturity. I reckon that you can get to that phase in about a two-year period, where you have a team in; you've got some process mapped; you've got a team in and you've got a program running in 23 to 48 months. This is an example from an actual roadmap that we created for a client of ours at Experience Dynamics. And it kind of gives you an actual idea of what that might look like. The fourth tactic is to *identify UX sponsors*. It's so important that you have a champion.

But I actually think it's *multi-level* – that you need someone at the senior level who's going to guard, defend and champion. Those are three very active words there. At the grassroots level, you need developers, and you need people who actually have their hand on the machine, if you will, and who can be your friend, who can be your ally, who can help you fight the battles. And then, at *middle-management*, you need people who are huge UX fans.

And I mean *demonstrated leaders*, not just people who *act* like they like UX, because I've worked with a lot of middle managers, and even some senior managers, who give "lip service passion" is what I call it. You know, so they're like, "Oh, yeah, UX is great! Oh, I love the UX! Oh, good job, you guys!" But really, privately, decisions are made that don't support the UX team, or there's undermining going on. And that happens *all the time* – it's ridiculous.

It's just a lack of demonstrated leadership with UX. That middle manager should be carrying the flag and running all the way down to the end of the field for you and taking the hits when they come and protecting you when they need to. And that's *rare* – that's so rare. There's a lack of UX managers, a lack of UX directors. CXOs – chief experience officers – are pretty rare, as well. But having an organic internal sponsor is *crucial*.

The fifth tactic is to *get comfortable with qualitative research fast*. So, realize that all good UX comes from *user behavior insights* – or all UX in general – it's all about *the user*: advocating for the user, having empathy for the user and then designing a solution that will fit the *context of what that user needs*, as we've already said. You should understand that by now, and your team should understand that, too – that that's what UX is.

So, insights are *qualitative* in nature, you know, and actually *all* usability research is essentially qualitative. Realize that the research rules for qualitative – "Qual" – and quantitative – or "Quant" – are different. And it's not about the number of users. So, that's the difference. So, a classic situation is the following. You get the manager who goes, "How come we're only testing with 10 users? How come we're not testing with 50 users? How come we..." – you know. We had a marketing director once tell us that – I think we had like 40 users for a field study, which is a pretty big field study. And he said, "Can you just bump it up a little? Keep bumping it up." And he had us – we eventually stopped negotiating at *300* users – I'm not kidding! – one of the largest field studies I've ever done. And actually what we ended up doing was doing *group interviews*. There's no way we could have done 300 users, because this happened within about a six-week period. So, we did group interviews of 25–30 users at a time.

And this was easy because it was a campsite, so we were interviewing campers. So, we gathered all the campers together, gave them pizza, gave them a nice gift and conducted these ethnographic *group interviews*, basically. And it wasn't quite a focus group, but kind of *like* a focus group. And, you know, we gave them little things to fill out, so we captured some data – some quantitative data. Remember that anything that's qualitative can be turned into *quant*.

So, qual data can be converted into quant. And we do this with usability testing. And we test – eight out of ten users struggle, so 80% struggle – the failure rate, for example, or... So, it's easy to do that, and we do that, but *knowing* that you're dealing with a qualitative methodology with usability *in general*. And so, qualitative samples are typically between 15 and 40 users. For field studies, it's about 15 to 40. For user testing, it's about 5 – so-called "5" users.

And I put that in quotation marks because that's the Nielsen and Rolf Molich study from 1991 that's become the legendary number of users to test. If you look at the original study, it's five *per segment*, and most of our clients have at least two, three or many more segments, and then you have to really start negotiating. But we test between 10 and 15.

Fifteen is the magic number in user testing. It's been empirically validated, if you're looking for empiricism there. So, *personas* need to be based on field studies, as well. So, don't just cook up your personas internally. They're not going to be as good; they're not even going to be *close* because I did that *years ago*, when I first became a usability engineer. I created a persona, and it was really hard.

And it was actually *really* hard once I'd done a field study – my first field study. And it was also hard to write them. You have to get used to writing the narratives. These days, what I do is I take the verbatim – you know, the notes – and actually use that for the field study. So, I do have like 98% actual *verbatim*. And it's easier. Instead of making stuff up and relanguaging, you're basically just cleaning up some grammar and using the verbatim. And it's actually much more "nutritionally dense" that way, so to speak.

So, user stories ought to be grounded with scenarios that are gained from field studies. It's like nobody talks about that – user stories and agile. You know, it's like, "As a user, I want to X, Y, Z." Well, based on what? Based on what insight? So, you may need to have an expert conduct your first or rebooted field research – you know – because you want to bring the credibility to it. Don't just send your lone UX designer out to do a field study if they're not trained in the methodology. If you're looking to make an organizational impact, bring in some consultants, bring in some seasoned UX folks to help you, to help that have a credible starting point for your research.

