# Qualitative research discussion

**Frank Spillers:** It seems to me that one of the keys with organizations is getting comfortable with qualitative research. You know, one of the things I've been emphasizing is that field studies are so strategic to UX maturity for some of the reasons we've even discussed so far. What would you say is the deal with qualitative research? And first maybe define qualitative research – what that looks like.

And then, what have you found with organizations as they embrace it? And maybe talk a little bit more about how organizations *can* embrace it. Daniel Loewus-Deitch: Sure, qualitative research is really the basis of empathy. It's the basis of understanding meaning in the world, understanding how people perceive and how they do things and how they collaborate together. So, in our culture, quantitative research has taken the driver's seat and is often considered more legitimate in a lot of ways. This is a challenge even in academics and in science. There's always been a lot of back-and-forth between quantitative and qualitative researchers on why one is better than the other – that sort of thing. F.S.: Right.

**D.L-D.:** Qualitative in recent years has really made some amazing gains in terms of people understanding the value of it and that statistical significance is not always everything. It depends on what you're trying to research. So, in qualitative research, when you're getting out there and you're digging deep, you can really understand what's behind all those numbers. So, at the end of the day, it's not "Is this better than this?" You need *both* of these things, and ideally you do it in a way where you can pair the two together so you can look at numbers to extrapolate, but then you can dig underneath to understand "Well, *why* are those numbers occurring?" F.S.: Sure, so it gives you the *insight*. That's its whole purpose – like you said – the empathy that's derived from doing field studies or doing ethnographic / culture studies essentially of your users or a national perspective if you're doing localization, for example.

But why do you think organizations don't jump to it? You know, it's one of these things – I'm sure you've worked in many organizations like I have where they don't embrace the field study. I was just speaking to a UX practitioner lately who said that it's not even possible to ask to do a field study because the answer is usually "no" – it's like it's not understood. What do you think is the issue there? D.L-D.: I think the issue is that it sounds academic to somebody who is in more of a kind of business manager role.

F.S.: Sure. D.L-D.: So, they hear someone say "research" and they start to think, "Okay, that's time. That's going to cost me a lot of time, a lot of expense, and it's going to delay me getting my product out." F.S.: Right. D.L-D.: And I think that scares them, and it can be a little threatening because they're also – you know – they might be worried about what you're going to find out there and is that going to blow up their roadmap.

F.S.: It's hilarious; it reminds me of a study – I spent a month on the road doing usability testing and a big field study, and came back, and the company said, "Where have you been?" They thought I was on vacation – you know – and I was working almost every day of that month on the road and gathered so much data. But the organization didn't really appreciate it. They weren't comfortable, really, with the fact that I was hanging out – literally, you know – with their users.

What is that? Like, why is it – you know, because from our perspective we think that's natural. You're hanging out with your users; you're empathizing, you're socializing with them. D.L-D.: I think that there's this idea, this attitude that as a company when you come up with a great idea – you know, maybe as a startup, to try to come up with this new innovative product – that you have this thing that they've never seen before, and so how can they tell you more about that idea that you have?

Because they've never *seen* this before. It's something that has never existed. Take the iPad when it first came out. How could you ask somebody about how they would use an iPad? (Because they'd never even heard of such a thing.) So, with that belief on the business organization side, they may believe that going out and talking to users is not going to be relevant
until you have something tangible to show them. So, they want to jump right to the usability testing and say, "Oh, we have this really cool concept that *we're* all excited about. And until we have something to really almost like sell it to you and *then* get your feedback, it's not going to be valuable to go out there. We're just going to be randomly asking you about what you do." In reality, what we know on the user experience side is that there's so much to be gained, to really immerse yourself and to build that empathy early on – to understand how people do things today, even if it's with paper and pencil or if it's some archaic system or, you know, cobbled together sort of homegrown thing; however they're doing what they do and however they're collaborating with others and, you know, getting things done in the way that they do it today is so important for you to understand – to put yourself in that mindset – because it's going to inform everything that you're doing when you go in and try to disrupt with this new innovative product. Now, the great thing about the business side that's trying to be disruptive in that way is user experience, by its nature, is *also* trying to be disruptive in a positive way and kind of improve people's lives by offering them something where they can do something in the way they'd never thought of before, but you can only do that going from *outside-in* because you really need to understand the culture that you're entering into before you try to disrupt it. F.S.: Yeah, that's a great point. It's just like shaking off your own internal inside-out culture and getting to this outside-in way of thinking. It seems to me like one of the things we teach in our user research training is getting comfortable with ambiguity. It seems to me that it's the – you know – you pointed to that, I think, when you said about the idea that you would want to hang out and "waste" time or "waste" the opportunity. "Wait! Just wait till we have something tangible!" etc., seems more logical. But the exploration that the user research or qualitative research gives you is really critical.

And it seems like making contact with your users is a good place to start and just start with a small field study. I mean, would that be your advice for organizations that haven't done that before? D.L-D.: That would *definitely* be my advice – to not plan a 40-participant study and do this huge "Big Bang" sort of thing at the beginning. But instead do something much smaller: go and talk to maybe three or four people for an hour or two each.

And just spend a day or two doing that, and help them understand all the insights that you got out of that. And show that this doesn't have to be something that is super time-consuming. But it's so important that you do it, and I think... F.S.: Yeah, I was going to say, it reminds me of when we do our user research training; we will actually go out and do a little live-fire field study.

And I remember the time – I know you were in this training – when the product manager, I think it was, she never actually had contact with a customer. She was so excited that she had actually been out and had contact with the customers. It was great to see her expression on her face with that. But that would be another thing – to find a training that allows you to do a field study in a controlled environment and understand the methodology and actually have some contact with your users – some kind of hands-on training like that might be a good place to start, as well. D.L-D.: And I think with that said – once again, talking about that co-ownership that we talked about earlier – is to be *inclusive* about the research. Once again, this isn't just something you go off and do and then come back from your safari and show everybody the pictures. F.S. Right. D.L-D.: I mean, if people want to go out and join you, there's nothing wrong with that. Now, you want to get them prepared and train them about not coming in and disrupting, taking over the interview, because we're going out there to listen; we're not going out there to judge what they're doing or tell them how they should do it differently. But they're supposed to be teaching us. So, it's kind of prepping them for what they're going to be a part of but inviting them to go out to those – particularly a product manager or even a developer – can do wonders to give them kind of those "Aha!" moments where they can go "Wow. I didn't really see it from that way. I didn't see that this is what they actually need."