# Balancing research and design

Frank Spillers: So, let's talk a little bit about research and design. And what is it, you know, about organizations that they think UX is just design? And even the term "UX designer" is the most popular way that a lot of organizations look for help with their user experience efforts. Can you talk a little bit about the importance of research and balancing that with design?

Alison Gavine: Absolutely. Often people think that UX design is just a type of design and it isn't really based on research – it's just someone's opinion of how this should be. 

F.S.: Like a creative task, like Photoshop. 

A.G.: Kind of like a creative task – oh, exactly, Photoshop – when in actual fact it's a *research method*. It's a research method, and therefore that research method needs to be brought into the organization as a role, as a *fundamental role* in itself. 

F.S.: To the team, to building the team. 

A.G.: To building the team. 

F.S.: And having that role present, a user researcher. 

A.G.: One of the most effective ways to get that out into the organization is for that role to actually be infiltrated throughout different teams within the organization. 

F.S.: Talk more about that. 

A.G.: So, your research team is not a team that needs to be stuck in the corner – in its own department, where it occupies its own place in the building – and then that's where you go to have things validated. That's not really what this is about. The most effective UX research is where research is done *across the teams*. So, it infiltrates across the teams. It's part and parcel of every team.

F.S.: Of product development, of decisions that are made, business decisions, requirements. 

A.G.: Exactly. 

F.S.: Product decisions, development decisions are – everything's infused almost; infiltrated, infused. 

A.G.: Absolutely. That's the most effective way for UX research to be implemented within an organization. 

F.S.: So, there are pros and cons of outsourcing user research, too, right? 

A.G.: Mm-hmm. 

F.S.: Because when you said "a separate team that's over in the corner", it reminded me of organizations that just outsource.
They'll have a UX designer, and they'll just outsource. And that might be good initially. But from a UX maturity perspective, you want to have a user researcher on your team. 

A.G.: Absolutely. 

F.S.: One who is *equally represented* as a UX designer I think is what I heard you say. 

A.G.: Absolutely. 

F.S.: What about for organizations that already *have* insights coming from marketing? You know, most organizations have a marketing team, and marketers are doing studies. Isn't that good enough? 

A.G.: No, that's never good enough, because you're marketers are not UX researchers. And those insights will not come from marketing. The job of a marketer is basically to sell a product. It's basically to validate the market. It's not to do the research, to find out what people really want or what changes— 

F.S.: Which – to be clear – is *behavioral research*; it's the key here. 

F.S. Because, in my mind, market research is *opinion-driven*, and usability research is *behavioral-driven* because we're not just trying to influence opinions; we're actually trying to get people to *use* things and adopt them and push buttons and make things happen on their own at home or on a mobile device or whatever the interface is that they touch. 

I've noticed that with projects that I've worked on where they said, "Don't do any user research, because it's already been done, and the customer insights team did it," for example, I was told once at Nike. And I've seen this in other examples, as well. I always feel less effective in the interaction design process because I wasn't close to the research that was done, and I've realized – you know – it was maybe done with a different agenda; it was maybe done with – you know – brand insights are very different to behavioral insights. A.G.: Yes. 

F.S.: So, it's all about *behavioral insights*. But, yeah, the projects where I've been able to actually have the intimacy with the insights of the user research have been the ones where the solutions for the UX design are clearer, faster and more elegant. And I've just noticed that – it's something I've noticed over the last couple of decades. So, that seems to be key, too. Now, there's a philosophical split with research and design in that role that a lot of people split it up.

You know, and it seems to be one of these luxuries of large organizations like Intel or IBM. 

A.G.: Yes. F.S.: You know, where you can have the PhD researcher and they don't do design, and then the designer; it's all siloed. I mean, what do you think are the pros and cons or what are the downsides of decoupling research from design or having separate roles doing that?

A.G.: Well, it really should be a process. In my experience, it's a process that works most effectively when it's fluid and it goes across every function in the organization. So, you know, it's not something that is effective when it's decoupled at all. These roles need to be interchangeable. So, when you have your UX researcher, and then you've got your UI designer,
those people need to work very closely together. Those people should *always* be working together. It's not one person sits off and does the research and then sends it out, moves on to the next thing. The design has to encompass all of those elements. 

F.S.: Yeah, I'm a fan of the UX designer does research and the design, as well. In other words, it's often the same person or it's in the same team. A.G.: Yes. F.S.: Because I think we've tried this, where we've had UX designers stay home, basically,
and the user researchers go out into the field, and I think it's just the empathy has to be derived through the *reporting of* the experience as opposed to the *direct* experience that you have. I think that's why getting UX designers – even if they're not comfortable with user research – getting them into those field studies and into the lab to do the direct observation can really help make them smarter and bring the solutions to them. 

F.S.: It's like we talk about feeling pain. It's like you literally have to be there. 

A.G.: You have to feel the pain. 

F.S.: Yeah, that person is saying, "Let me show you how difficult this is!" and they're pulling out their example. And you're going, "Oh, wow! I'm not going to forget this user!" 

A.G.: It's so much easier to get the empathy by experiencing the pain firsthand. So, actually being able to get your UI designers actually *into* the situation where they're actually *directly observing* – whether it be in a lab or whether it be in someone's home, if it's a field study or someone's office or someone's workplace – but to actually get them to see the person in that environment, *immersed* in that environment with *all* their distractions and all of the workflow – to actually be able to put them in that person's shoes, in their world, for one hour will make a *huge* difference to their understanding of where the issues are with the design and what needs to change. 

F.S.: Yeah, that kind of speaks to what you were saying in the beginning about the strong need for design research being represented, available across the whole organization, not just tucked away for the usability or UX person to use for their own deliverables, but for the whole *team* to benefit from that. 

A.G.: It's a process, and it needs to be, as I said, infiltrated
throughout the organization. It needs to be part of that; there needs to be a fluidity. And training is a great way – to train organizations to think that way, to *think about it that way*. It's a huge challenge, but I've seen examples of that, and that's where the ROI is in any design. That's where the ROI is, when that process is built in, and that's part of UX maturity.

You know, we're not talking about startups here. But that's in organizations where they have seen how progressive that can be. 

F.S.: It reminds me of a study that Forrester did with a *redesign* of a website – the teams that used personas and that did field research; they're very clear that personas come from actual research, not just cooked up again in Photoshop. A.G.: Yeah.

F.S.: Or in a Word document, but the ROI in that is a four-times return on those sites that used the personas. So, that's a really nice statistic. It kind of quantifies that you can get smarter by actually coupling research and design together. 