# Towards outside-in

What we're trying to do here is move towards an outside-in design organization. And here are some tips and tricks for *any* organization to use. First of all, getting to *beliefs and values* – get to the bottom of your organization's beliefs and values. What do they believe about UX? This is important to pass to your trainer, by the way.

When we do UX training, we listen to the organizations that we train with and we use that as a way to kind of customize the content and the message so that it's not just canned and it's not just theoretical. And that's what makes our training so successful. We work with a lot of corporate organizations. Beliefs and values – so, what are people *thinking* about UX? And what's important to them about UX, about the UI?

What's important to stakeholders? What's important to program/product managers and even project managers? What's important to the UX team? What's the *experience* of the UX team? I've seen *everything* over my career. I've seen UX teams that are like in a bunker that are fighting a war. I've seen UX teams that are fully empowered and walking around with their heads high and doing what they're supposed to be doing. And I've seen startups that are just trying to figure it out and doing bits and pieces of best practices and then getting lazy and sloppy. So, what would happen if you *didn't* validate your assumptions? What would happen if you *did*? So, it's about asking questions like that. It's really important to uncover that for your organization – not what *you* think is important but the rest of your organization. And, of course, how are you *measuring success*? Is any type of success being measured in the organization?

How can you take those basic metrics of your organization's success measure – especially if you're a startup, especially if your VC is breathing down your neck for results – then you have a reason to build your UX metrics on top of that. So, behind this is – I alluded to training, education, but also measurement and ROI. The other question is *what type of brain* are you selling to? What I mean by that is – when I work with organizations, I don't assume that anybody has bought into usability.

It's really dangerous to get excited by your own methodologies and your own culture of UX. So, when I say "What kind of brain are you selling to?" I'm talking about quant – that quant/qual thing again. Right? The quant/qual thing – so, I found it very effective for the *quantitative*, which is *most* of the world, by the way. Most organizations don't understand qual. Most managers and most successful organizations in the IT business don't understand qualitative.

So, they default to quant, because it's easier to trust numbers, except they forgot to read that book called "How to Lie with Statistics" by Huff, from the 1950s. It's a little red book. Right – so, you can distort anything quantitative. Qualitative is about *listening to people's stories* and, as we saw, getting comfortable with balancing user research with UX design, getting comfortable with testing – so important with validating, with listening and getting the user stories brought into your organizational, your UI process – it's *so* important. But if you're dealing with a quantitative brain, do a survey with your field study. Do a survey with your usability test and get some numbers, get some quantitative data – not really to back it up but just to give another data point. It's really cool! I've done this with focus groups, as well. So, I've done field research *and* the focus group because the stakeholder – the brain I was selling to – was not necessarily quantitative but was "focus group, focus group – for that's research – focus groups". And as you know, hopefully, focus groups are *inappropriate*. They're a market research technique. We're interested in *behavioral research* because in UX we're trying to push the users to be motivated to actually perform behaviors by themselves at home, or with their phone or device or whatever it is. So, it's important to understand your stakeholders, what kind of brain they're operating with, and to *respect* it.

This isn't about shoving a qualitative vision down their throat. It's like the whole nature versus nurture. If you talk to the leading zoologists, they say it's not helpful to make the distinction of nature versus nurture. They *both* play a role, and I found that the qual-quant debate or fight is worthless because they *both* are valuable in their own right. Now, if you *blend* them, you've got the best of both worlds. So, that's an idea. *Competitor stories and behavior* is the number one motivator for change in an organization.

In terms of getting your strategy moving, this is huge. *Tell the competitor stories*. I've seen organizations jump, fund, move – you know – cause a huge change. I've seen organizations go from being hostile to UX to just embracing UX wholeheartedly because they're getting killed in their sales calls: you know, "Oh, the competitor's UI is much better!"

So, in my company, we help a lot of organizations who are industry leaders but maintain that because some new upstart is starting to take over their share and has a beautiful UI and is doing UX. And that's across industries. It's a *huge* motivator for change. The other one is *looking for your ROI evangelist* – track down and befriend what I call the "ROI whisperers".

The "whisperers" is, for people who are international who maybe didn't watch "The Dog Whisperer" (a TV show). So, it's someone who actually knows how to talk to dogs or befriend dogs. There are people in your organization who are close to the ROI, and they may be salespeople; they may be customer support. It might be the CFO; it might be the CEO. It might be a *legal* person. I had a legal person come to me and say, "Keep telling these stories." And I had other people in the organization uncomfortable with the field data I was bringing in.

And the legal guy went, "That's really important – keep saying that." The problem was he didn't have any weight, but I was able to mention him in meetings. And in some meetings where he was there, I was able to say, "You over there, you said." And he was like, "Yeah. Yeah." And, of course, everyone's afraid of the lawyer. So, you know... It's just a helpful way to help build the case and help the organization become comfortable. Ground your qualitative research with the return on investment. That is critical.

That is critical. And this stuff all leads to business objectives, business results. Also, don't hide your UX efforts. Make your deliverables *actionable*. Live and breathe those efforts – so, educate, educate, educate. Buy books for senior managers. That's a recommendation from Harley Manning at Forrester. Slack UX articles, using the Slack system or your internal wiki if you use a wiki or if you use a project management tool.

Start discussions across your company. Show your rationale. Why are you doing this with personas? This is a great picture that Olle Torgny used in his work back with Media Lab in the year 2000. And the important thing there is that's the year 2000, so people have been doing this for a long time. These hacks, some of these things – there are many decades of experience or at least a couple of decades, a couple of *strong* decades of people trying different things and running into the exact same problems that you may be having with your organization or that you've faced with your customers or clients or your partners. Don't assume everyone's passionate about UX. Like I said, I *never* assume that. And that means it's the burden on me to make my deliverables and my communication accessible and easy for people to get their arms around.

*Arrange a team training* and make sure you get an IDF team membership, because education is *so* critical to your strategy. *Building and using patterns* is also important. Patterns of best practice – let's start there, organization-wide. Create a Quick Win project. So, if you're starting UX or you're reigniting your UX efforts, have a project that creates a "bang for the buck", that gets people interested, that's valuable, that's grounded.

I did some research for a team at Microsoft that had never done field research. They'd tried every other kind of research, and they said, "We want to make sure we're not missing anything." So, we did the field research, brought it back. They got the report – silence... *nothing*. A month later, I thought, "Well, it's August. You know, people are on vacation." They came back, and they said: "We thought your personas report was *bullshit*. So, we gave it to our MVP, our most valuable professional (a 25-year veteran, a Microsoft veteran – you know, a heavyweight).

He looked at your report, and *he* thought it was bullshit, too!" And at this point I'm going, "Uhh!" And they said, "But it was so well done; it was so *convincing* and done right, essentially, that we decided that it wasn't your report; it wasn't the data you gathered; it was *the way we were looking at the problem* that was the issue. So, they decided to take the courage path. But I also note that the program manager who was involved in that – a very senior guy who was second-in-command to the CEO, so a very, very high level and high stakes – his intention going into bringing us in was to be open-minded. It wasn't accidental. But looking for what works for your users is critical in pattern libraries. And pattern libraries are about repeatability. They're about *tested* – user-tested – UI elements.

Most people create pattern libraries that are not user-tested, but they *should* be user-tested. And the reason that patterns are so important is the *comfort and familiarity that users bring*. So, users/humans, as you know, are pattern-creating and do object recognition. We look for patterns and things. And, in fact, we have a tendency towards negativity bias. We look for *what's wrong* with things. This is a problem if you're a UX person, because you need to be aware of that so you don't go around calling everyone's baby "ugly" – as the expression goes. You want to be sensitive to designers and developers because they're human beings, too. I've worked with people who go around insulting because of their negativity bias. They're looking for what's wrong, and they get *stuck* in that. Negativity bias makes you stuck in that. And then, *everything's wrong*, you know. But patterns are really important for your organization, but also as comfort levels for people because human beings look for what's familiar; we look for what is *not relearnable* because that's how smart we are. We need to just keep going and use our cognitive bandwidth in other ways that don't involve relearning. So, *familiarity* is *the main thing* that users gravitate towards. Patterns encapsulate that.