# The role of QA

Frank Spillers: So, with quality, there's a drive from the product and development team to create quality product. And I think for management teams, some of them might get confused that the QA team or the dev team is a good place to place UX because it's part of quality improvement. What are your thoughts with regard to that topic? 

Daniel Loewus-Deitch: That's an interesting thought.

With QA and development, there have been some interesting things that I've experienced in organizations around when it comes to usability testing versus testing for bugs – things like that. 

F.S.: Right; software testing. D.L-D.: Exactly. What we found is the user experience organization is much better equipped to be checking the quality of the look and feel and the behavior of the user interface because from the very beginning they've been designing it – designing the prototype, very meticulously down to all the micro-interactions. They know it inside and out. They know exactly what padding should be on any given element, exactly what should happen when you roll over a particular link, etc.

So, what we found is actually most efficient is, as the product, as the UI is being developed, to have a constant check-in, sometimes even daily. And it can only take five or ten minutes. It really doesn't have to be time-consuming to have the UX designer just look over the shoulder of a developer and say, "Hey, where are you at with the UI? Can I check it out? Can you give me a little walkthrough?" And then, they can point out: "Oh, can you just move that over a few pixels here to match it with the prototype?"

"When you right-click over here, there's supposed to be a bigger delay." – that sort of thing. The QA team is not necessarily going to pick up on those nuances. And it's not as efficient for them to be trying to figure that later down the road, especially because earlier on the developer can change it much more quickly because they're right in there and they can just go, "Oh, okay; let me just fix this now." So, testing it down the road with QA, you're running up against the schedule and you're having to get it out.

They might not have time to go back in and have a developer go back and try to fix that. So, doing that more in a fluid way with the user experience designer is much easier than doing that later at QA. 

F.S.: Yeah. I think it's also – for me, it's just very simply a separation of church and state. I don't see QA as having *anything* to do with UX really, in my mind, other than the goal of quality, because QA is just part of good software development.

It's an essential – you know – like you said, unit testing or software-based testing. That has nothing to do with usability testing, which is "Is this even the right expectation? Is this the right concept? Is this even the right UI?" Who cares if it's quality approved or customer accepted? If it's not the right UI for their needs or for their expectations *cognitively*, then who cares?! And that's why I see them as *totally* separate. And I once worked with a company that had the UX designer embedded in the QA group; she was managed by the QA group. And guess what? She wasn't very effective. And then, they did it again. She left, and they had another QX person come in – embedded in the QA team. You know, *logically* it made sense, right? A software development organization – QA, usability, quality. But she wasn't able to have the impact that she needed to, because she was just seen as the bug-checker. You know – and so, yeah, I think that's the downside of QA and vetting.

D.L-D.: Yeah, and I think that with user acceptance, the term itself can be problematic because it gets tied in with you thinking, "Okay, we're testing this with actual users," and it can be confused with usability testing. But as you said, it's much more about "Okay, is this functionally working from a code standpoint?" And you'll hear sometimes from QA folks that they feel like they can be substitutes for the users
because they're constantly digging in and using the interface all day long. 

That's bad, too. There might be some validity from the standpoint of as a power user and having to do things repetitively all day – they might be able to have a little bit of insight. But, of course, nothing compares to getting out and testing with actual users in a non-contrived sort of situation that's not based on scripts that you're doing in QA. 

F.S.: Right. Exactly; exactly. Yeah, so the technique is different. Yeah, totally different. D.L-D.: And the *intent*.
00:05:04 --> 00:05:10
F.S.: The intent as, well, yeah.