# Creating a UX culture to rival Apple

We've come to one of my favorite sections, which is creating a UX culture to rival Apple. I think we need to set the bar high and understand what Apple did, since they've become the kind of main organization that embodies great design, that's helped them go from the ruins to the phoenix rising out of the ashes.

Well, the things we know about Apple's UX culture – they have been doing this a long time. They created the term "user-friendly". Steve Jobs in the early '80s was actually not happy with what he saw with the Apple computer: their early Apple. And he said this. There's a great quote from him. You can dig into early YouTube footage. He basically said, "This thing is too confusing; there are too many functions, and we have human beings here.

Let's figure out how to make it work for human beings." So, you had that CEO-level buy-in. You saw the same thing at Google. You had the CEOs, the founders of Google actually bringing their *usability sensitivity*, which meant that from the beginning they had usability; they were starting much higher on the maturity ladder. So, if you're a new company starting and you don't know about usability, you're going to suffer unless you study up real quick.

Everyone on your team needs to be thinking about usability. All data *pours* into the product team. So, you've got user data, like we said in one of our earlier interviews – it's *organization-wide*. Everybody in the organization is thinking about it. Mark Kawano, who used to be a senior UX designer at Apple, said that it's not just the designers that are thinking about the users, but *everybody* is thinking about them. So, Apple's culture is a culture where it is not contrived but it's totally okay to talk about the users' needs, to think about usability, to try and make things easier. It's *ingrained* in everybody's thought process. It's ingrained in everybody's thought process. So, think of, for example, emotion or accessibility. At Apple, those things are key, and they've actually built them into the way their building is.

The new Apple complex is built specifically around emotion, accessibility, usability, workability, you know. It's this challenge of how do you create a product that has a great experience and an *organization* that has a great experience? And that's critical to what we're talking about, right? They've also got a *design head*, which is this visionary UX leader. So, that's Jonathan Ive, and he leads all the usability for product.

But, you know, I don't think it's possible for you to "become" Apple, because you're a different organization. You've got a different story. It's not really about that. But you can create a culture that can *rival* Apple's by building in some of the things that took them many years to refine. Apple is not perfect. They have their problems, too, you know. And you see it with their launch of products; you see it with some of their failed products, some of their products that didn't do well, some of their products that drive users crazy, like iTunes.

iTunes had something like an 80% *hate rate* in a survey; I think it was around 2007 or 2008. But I would say it is still pretty consistent. They haven't really changed the product. It's a total nightmare of an application – you know – just clunky and limited. Similarly, with the OS, I personally believe that the Mac OS requires a lot of technical knowledge to use it. It could be a *lot* more user-friendly. It relies on the hierarchical organization structure for storing files.

That's not the way human memory is organized. And so, it's similar to Microsoft's operating system, which stores hierarchically – you know – a parent-child relationship for your files. Well, that's not how human beings think. We store things emotionally, socially. We store things through context. You know, our memory is much more sophisticated than what we see in these old-school representations.
00:04:30 --> 00:05:03
So, there's a lot of work to be done there, but you don't see it, because of the legacy sort of control at Microsoft and at Apple. But with new products – like when they went into the device area; Jonathan Ive being an industrial designer and having a perspective from England (he's English), which may help, and maybe it doesn't – but having that kind of executive champion making decisions, you know. The former employees at Apple used to say that Steve Jobs was a nightmare
00:05:03 --> 00:05:33
because he would corner you in the elevator and ask you about your design and your UI. They said that when he was dying he was even trying to reinvent the patient experience and devices that he was having to use in the hospital. So, here you have someone who's *obsessed* at the CEO level. Now, a chief experience officer can perform that same function, especially if your CEO is more of an engineer or your CEO is more checked out, and there are many CEOs who fit that description.
00:05:33 --> 00:06:01
So, you need to resuscitate the passion at an executive level like Apple has. You see that currently with Tim Cook. He's trying to be Jobs – he's trying to bring the passion. You see it at the senior-management levels, as well, at Apple. When they do their demos and when they talk about their products, they're trying to have that Jobsian passion that exists. And they do it pretty well. They're not Steve Jobs, but they do it pretty well.
00:06:01 --> 00:06:32
Here's some more that we know about Apple's UX culture: Design is everything. *Everything*! The *design reports to the CEO*. So, you have a reporting structure that ties into executive authority. Whoa! How many organizations do you know that have that? Very, very few. I don't know very many. I know a few startups that have that, but in the enterprise organizations that I work in like Apple
00:06:32 --> 00:07:08
I don't see that. Now, that's changed at Google and Microsoft. But it's still not common across other organizations that are not just in IT and consumer goods – electronics. Now, they also have very small design teams – they're about 12 to 20 people. So, less is more. I mean, I learned early on. I was brought into what they called the "Navy Seal" or the "Hit Squad" – like this, you know, small design team of two or three UX designers tackling, just cranking out
00:07:08 --> 00:07:31
– you know, making decisions in really tight small teams. So, that works really well. And that was something that I was part of by way of necessity – a large organization was saying: "This is not scaling. We need some lightning-fast UX teams that can just come in and just – boom! – start creating solutions."
00:07:31 --> 00:08:01
So, designers make the design decisions. This is critical. And when we say "designers", we're talking UX designers here. We'll talk a little bit more about what designers are because a lot of people use the terms interchangeably. And I want you to be clear that when you use the term "designer" who you're talking about. So, Apple also does *pixel-perfect mock-ups*. So, that's a cultural attribute. They don't mess around with low-grade wireframes; they actually get in there and make them pixel-perfect.
00:08:01 --> 00:08:35
It's kind of like what I was talking about – that technique of the *visually enhanced wireframe* that I mentioned in the last segment. So, they've also *paired their design meetings*, so an engineer and a designer will work together – like two in a pod kind of thing: great idea! They don't do market research, at least not for usability. Now, there's a myth that they don't do user research, but they *do* do user research. And there is the final one, which is if it's not perfect, it doesn't go out.
00:08:35 --> 00:08:44
So, they build quality in from the beginning.